---
layout: post
title: Models for Option Pricing
subtitle: Can a model reproduce Black-Scholes when given the same inputs?
bigimg: /img/blue-and-yellow-graph-on-stock-market-monitor-159888.jpg
tags: [finance, options, black-scholes]

---
# Abstract
Guiding Question? Why? What? Results / Outcome? 


# Option Pricing
### History
The Black-Scholes-Merton (BSM) option pricing model was first introduced in 1973 by Fischer Black and Myron Scholes in their
seminal paper titled, "The Pricing of Options and Corporate Liabilities" published in the *Journal of Political Economy*. It's
influence on financial markets is hard to understate, and in recognition of their work, Scholes and Merton were awarded the 
Nobel Prize in Economics in 1997. Since it's publication, the BSM pricing model has become THE foundational model for pricing 
the theorectical values of all option types. Specifically, the Black Model is a derivation of the original BSM formula that 
is used to value the price of European options on both forwards and futures. 

Prior to their publication, other research had been done in order to value option prices, but most models revolved around the 
pricing of warrants. Most notably, Sprenkle (1961) was able to derive a formula that looks very similar to what we know today 
as the BSM model, however, there were various other parameters that needed to be estimated (such as *k* which can be thought 
of as the discount factor adjusted for the stock specific risk) in order to derive the options value -- even Sprenkle 
himself could not estimate some of the these variables efficiently and reliably, creating numerous arbitrage opportunities. 
Ultimately, the BSM model won out in terms of it's use case and is used today as the foremost method for pricing financial 
options.


### BSM Model Inputs, Outputs and Methodology
In order for the BSM model to work, Black and Scholes needed to make a number of assumptions:
 
  - The underlying asset price follows a geometric Brownian motion process, and the underlying returns are lognormally      distributed 
  - The continuously compounded, risk-free rate of return is both constant and known
  - The annualized volatility of the unerlying asset is both constant and known
  - There are no transaction costs (taxes, fees, etc.) and there are no restrictions on short sales and their profits
  - The continuouly compounded yield on the underlying asset is both constant and known
  - The options are European, and can only be exercised at expiration
 
Outside of these assumptions, one of the most important aspects of this model to remember is that it satisfies the "no-
arbitrage" condition that the option price will be the one that, when included in a portfolio, will yield the risk-free rate 
of return. 

The BSM model for pricing calls and puts take in the following inputs:

- *S* = Current Stock Price
- *X* = Strike Price
- *r* = Continuously Compounded Risk-Free Rate 
- *T* = Time to Maturity (based on the percentage of the year left until expiration)
- *v* = Annualized Volatility of the underlying assets returns
- *d1* = 
- *d2* = 
- *N(+ / - d*)* = Cumulative Standard Normal Probability of d1 or d2 (positive value for calls and negative for puts)

and outputs the call (C0) and put (P0) prices below:

- C0
- P0

To simplify the equation inputs, I estimated the risk-free rate (2.14%) by using the 2019, 10-year treasury yields as a 
proxy; I attain this informtion from the US Treasury website. I used the 10-year treasury, and not the Fed Funds rate, because 
of the inability for retail, and some institutional, traders to have access to borrowing and lending at the Fed Funds rate. 
Additionally, I estimated the annualized volatility (28.88%) of the underlying index for 2019 via macrotrends.

The N(d1) and N(d2) terms are probabilities; N(d1) is thought of as the conditional probability of ..... N(d2) is thought of 
as the probability that the option price is expire in-the-money(ITM). 


# Modeling
I chose to fit two different model types: a Linear Regression and a Random Forest Regression. I chose the Linear Regression 
model as a baseline to predict the option traded price, not only because of it's simplicity in terms of understanding the 
outputs, but also because of the dataset I chose. Had I used the option tradde price mean, median, or mode as a baseline, due 
to outliers on both sides of the distribution, the baseline estimate would have been skewed dramatically -- some trade prices 
were as low as .05$ or as a high as 300$, thus, I determined the most efficient baseline would be the Linear Model itself.

I chose the Random Forest Regression model as my second model type for a number of reasons; first, it is similar to the 
binomial option pricing model which uses a decision tree like methodology for pricing based on the probability of the 
underlying assets movements over time. Secondly, the fact that a Random Forest is an ensemble method, which amalgamates the 
outputs of many decision trees to inform the final output, works well when trying to estimate nonlinear relationships between 
variables. Additionally, a Random Forest Regression is able to handle multicollinearity better than most other models, and 
when modeling variables that have interdependencies to other variables it is important to consider that.

My guiding question for this project was: "Can a model predict the actual trade price of an option if given the same inputs
as the BSM model?" The answer lends itself to another question; if a model can accurately predict price, what other features 
and aspects of the model can we reengineer, amend (feature engineering), or tune (parameters, hyperparameters, etc.), to more 
effectively model the true option price?

### Dataset and Feature Engineering 
I chose to predict the actual options trade price for those on the SPX (S&P 500 Index, that does NOT pay dividends); it was 
gather from the Chicago Board Option Exchange (CBOE); because the CBOE is the official source for options and option pricing 
data, I figured it would be the most accurate source for all the necessary information to calculate the BSM model variables. 
Although the dataset was relatively clean, there were some adjustments that I needed to make in order to get it in the right 
condition for modeling. For example, I needed to filter out all the information for 2020, and make sure that all the strike 
and unerlying bid-ask information didn't contain information that would create errors during modeling. 

I was able to engineer the BSM model inputs using the code below:

```python
def bsm_inputs(dataf):
    
    Y = dataf.copy()
    
    S = Y['underlying_ask']
    K = Y['strike']
    r = Y['risk_free_rate']
    v = Y['annualized_vol']
    T = Y['T']
    
    D1 = ((np.log(S / K) + (r + (v ** 2 / 2))) * T) / (v * np.sqrt(T))
    Y['d1'] = D1
    
    D2 = D1 - (v * np.sqrt(T))
    Y['d2'] = D2
    
    Nd1 = norm.cdf(D1)
    Y['nd1'] = Nd1
    
    Nd2 = norm.cdf(D2)
    Y['nd2'] = Nd2
    
    return Y
```

The above code takes a dataframe and assigns variables to particular columns inside that dataframe; in particular, the columns 
necessary for calculating the N(dn) terms and their inputs. It then creates a new dataframe column by applying a formula 
inside the function (example: D1) and then using that newly created column(Y['d1']) to inform the creation of the next column 
(Y['d2']). At the end, it returns the new completed dataframe with all the additional columns. As stated before, I used a 
risk-free rate of return of 2.14%, and an annualized volatiltiy of 28.88%. 

I chose three seperate feature groups to test my models with:

```python
# Features
bsm_features= ['option_type', 'underlying_ask', 'strike', 'erT', 'nd1', 'nd2']

other_features= ['trade_iv', 'trade_delta', 'option_bid_ask_spread',
                  'underlying_bid_ask_spread', 'risk_free_rate', 'annualized_vol']

all_features= bsm_features + other_features

# Target 
target= 'trade_price'
```
The rest of this post will speak to the modeling results and subsequent analysis that was done following it.

### Results and Scoring
I used three evaluation metrics to evaluate my models: (1) Mean Squared Error (MSE), (2) Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), and
(3) R^2 Score (R^2). These were chosen based on my understanding of statistics and econometrics, as well as their 
interpretability. The following are the coefficients, intercepts and evaluation metrics for the Linear Model results for each 
of the given feature sets and the specified model:

| **Variables** | **BSM Input Coefficients** | **Other Input Coefficients** | **All Input Coefficients** |
| :------------ | :------------------------- | :--------------------------------- | : ------------------------ |
| underlying_ask | 4.98 | -- | 12.58 |
| nd1 | 42.84  | -- | 38.50 |
| strike | -11.85 | -- | -33.13 |
| erT | -7.29  | -- | -8.17 |
| nd2 | -44.48 | -- | -50.22 |
| option_type | 8.37 | -- | 2.09 |
| trade_iv | -- |-1.49 | -16.24 |
| trade_delta | -- | 7.10 | 5.47 |
| option_bid_ask_spread | --  | 5.20 | 3.71 |
| underlying_bid_ask_spread | -- | -0.28 | .025 |
| risk_free_rate | -- | 0.00 | 0.00 |
| annualized_vol | -- | 0.00 | 0.00 |
| : --- | : --- | :--- | :--- |
| **MSE** | 3277.38 | 3596.78 | 3171.49 |
| **RMSE** | 57.24 | 59.97 | 56.31 |
| **R^2** | 0.1203 | 0.0346 | 0.1487 |

The absolute value of the above coefficients speak to the importance of each feature within that given model; most notably, 
the ..........

In regards to the Random Forest modeling, I ran two random forests: (1) with the BSM model inputs, and (2) with the 
other, alternative feature inputs. The following feature importance graphs illustrate the magnitude of each features 
importance in that particular model.

![Feature Importance BSM] / {: .center-block :}

![Feature Importance Other] /img/ {: .center-block :}


### Permutation Feature Importances
Feature Importances
Visual
Equations and Output
- Graphing relationship between trade delta and option price


Permutation methodology
why? thesis? output?
- eli5 




# Further Analysis Road-Map
This is the beginning of a foray into finding new and improved ways to price options based off of both numeric and non-
numeric, financial and alternative data. By utilizing both financial, and non-financial information, and repurposing ideas 
from other disciplines, I hope to create a dataset informative enough to create a model that can rival one that is 
given only the BSM model inputs. Namely, I hope to recalibrate the existing BSM model, specifically in relation to the use of 
geometric Brownian Motion in defining the Random Walk of stock prices, and create something that is more indicative of the 
dynamic system that is financial markets. I also plan on looking into what option greeks are most informative to option 
pricing theory, and whether they can utilized seperately, or recombined with other factors, to reliably predict the trade 
price of options.


