---
layout: post
title: Et tu Citrics?
subtitle: Overcoming Adversity
tags: [Data Analytics, Data Science, Research]
---

# Background and Insights
First, an introduction; hello, my name is Rourke Struthers and I am currently a student in the Data Science and Machine Learning track at Lambda School. Over the two months 
I have been working on a coding project called Citrics -- a web application that allows users to explore and compare historical weather, job, and real estate data, as well 
as predictions for future trends in these areas, in specific cities around the continental United States that they may consider moving to. One of the main consumer problems this 
project is trying to solve is the inabiity to have concise and relevant data readily available, in user chosen categories that actually matter to you. When you are looking to 
move to a new city, what are some of the most important criterion to consider? Citrics helps not only to determine this, but also give you reliable predictions as to the overall 
growth and trends in those specified areas. For example, if you're a real estate employee trying to move from New York to either Chicago or Lake Tahoe, some of the major 
considerations would be weather, job market data and trends, as well as real estate values and the appreciation your property value might experience over your desired time 
horizon -- Citrics helps to provde all of that relevant information and then some. The value proposition to users is not only the data and the predictions however, it is all 
encompassing of the entire experience when using the application itself -- the hope and desire is a product that can provide valuable insight, utility and research potential for 
any user with a technical background or otherwise.  

# Responsibilities, Challenges and Replication
My role on the Citrics project has been prodominantly focused on Data Analysis and Analytics, Manipulation, Research, and Modeling --my responsibilities include accessing APIs
to collect the data, writing functions and queries to clean and manipulate the data to get it into the right format, develop the data engineering storage schema, 
make decisions around the most important modeling questions -- specifically aroudn time-series data and the statistical concepts surrounding the data modeling. 

We had to overcome an extreme amount of adversity on this project. Over the course of the 8 weeks that we have been working, the core group had dwindled from 10 team members
to 4 team members. We ended with two front-end developers that also handled the back-end, and two data scientists that also handled data engineering responsibilities. Despite
this, we were still able to ship a quality product -- I cannot speak enough to the appreciation I have for my remaining team members. I learned so much intangible knowledge and
experience from this project, and that is one of the things I really appreciate and will always carry with me from this experince. To address a specific example, mid-way through
the project, the specifications for the data science backend-end and API changed which required us to switch from a flask and heroku based system to a FastAPI and AWS - Elastic 
Beanstalk based system. On top of that, a change in scope forced us to replace most of the old data and information with new research. All of this with only two remaining data
science team members. 

Below is some of the code we had to write for the data manipulation process; specifically it's the function we wrote for converting the information from our Facebook Prophet
time-series predictions, to a JSON object that we can then pass to the front-end through our FastAPI.

```python
def housing_pred_JSON_func(df):
  pred_dict = {}

  for city_state in df['city_state']:
    pred_dict[city_state] = {}

  for idx in range(0, df.shape[0], 5):
    # CITY_STATE
    city_state_ = df['city_state'][idx]

    # YEARS AND VALUES
    years_ = df['year'][idx: idx+5]
    values_ = df['Predicted Value'][idx: idx+5]

    # IF CITY_STATE IN DICT, ZIP THE WINDOW VALUES AND
    # ADD THEM TO THE PRED_DICT VALUE 
    if city_state_ in pred_dict:
      years_values_dict = dict(zip(years_, values_))

      pred_dict[city_state_] = years_values_dict

  # JSON
  pred_JSON = json.dumps(pred_dict)

  return pred_JSON
```

I'm looking forward to the opportunity to improve this project in the future with my information and resources to give a more comprehensive view of the United State and what it
provides for people looking for travel, permanent housing or otherwise. I can't wait to start this new project and venture, Lambda has given me all the tools for success, and I
look forward to using them to the best of my ability.

